Volterra System Analysis for an Electrochemical Sensor
by
Billal Iqbal
B.S. Mechanical Engineering and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2024
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF ENGINEERING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER
SCIENCE
at the
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
May 2024
©2024 Billal Iqbal. This work is licensed under a CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
The author hereby grants to MIT a nonexclusive, worldwide, irrevocable, royalty-free
license to exercise any and all rights under copyright, including to reproduce, preserve,
distribute and publicly display copies of the thesis, or release the thesis under an
open-access license.
Authored by: Billal Iqbal
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
May 22, 2024
Certified by: Ian W. Hunter
George N. Hatsopoulos Professor in Thermodynamics, Thesis Supervisor
Accepted by: Katrina LaCurts
Chair, Master of Engineering Thesis Committee
---PAGE BREAK---
2
---PAGE BREAK---
Volterra System Analysis for an Electrochemical Sensor
by
Billal Iqbal
Submitted to the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
on May 22, 2024 in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF ENGINEERING IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING AND COMPUTER
SCIENCE
ABSTRACT
Current biological methods for quantifying bacterial and fungal populations are time and
labour intensive, whilst remaining expensive to automate. A potential solution to this prob-
lem is an electrochemical sensor, which applies a stochastic voltage across a liquid medium
and measures the resultant current flow. This data can then be used to model the liquid’s
electrochemical interactions and monitor it for bacterial growth and spoilage. Linear dy-
namic impedance models have previously been explored for this. However, the ability to
capture the nonlinear effects observed at higher voltages can provide greater insights into
the liquid’s properties. This is extremely difficult with neural networks which offer accurate
predictive capabilities without much insight into the system. A different strategy is to model
the liquid using a Volterra series representation. This work will document the integration of
Volterra system identification capabilities within the sensor and its performance when mod-
elling different liquid media as well as modifications made to the sensor for the applications
tested.
Thesis supervisor: Ian W. Hunter
Title: George N. Hatsopoulos Professor in Thermodynamics
3
---PAGE BREAK---
4
---PAGE BREAK---
Acknowledgments
Iwouldliketothankmyfamilyfortheirendlesssupportthroughoutmystudiesandresearch.
Their love and support has provided me with the determination to tackle the challenges I
have faced head on and constantly strive to improve myself both academically and as a per-
son.
I would also like to thank Michael Aling for his help and mentorship throughout my re-
search. His patience, knowledge and advice have made my research an amazingly rewarding
experience and I would not have progressed as far with my work without him.
Moreover, I want to thank Prof. Ian Hunter, Dr. Cathy Hogan and Winn Gatewood,
for their work in maintaining the Bio-instrumentation lab and fostering a collaborative en-
vironment, as well as their help conducting and analysing experiment results.
I would also like to acknowledge ChatGPT for helping proofread my final thesis draft and
identifying grammatical errors.
5
---PAGE BREAK---
6
---PAGE BREAK---
Contents
Title page 1
Abstract 3
Acknowledgments 5
List of Figures 9
1 Introduction 11
1.0.1 Project Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2 Background 13
2.1 System Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1.1 Linear System Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.1.2 Nonlinear System Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2 Electrochemical Sensor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.2.1 Sensor Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3 Volterra Series for Electrochemical System Analysis 23
3.0.1 Tensor Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.0.2 Multi-Layer Perceptron Volterra Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.0.3 Software Testing - Tungsten Filament Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4 Milk Impedance Analysis 35
4.0.1 Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.0.2 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5 Sugar Solution Impedance Analysis 39
5.0.1 Well Plate Sensor Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.0.2 Portable Computation Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.0.3 Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.0.4 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.0.5 Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6 Future Work 49
7
---PAGE BREAK---
7 Conclusion 51
Bibliography 53
8
---PAGE BREAK---
List of Figures
2.1 Block diagram representation of a Wiener system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.2 Block diagram representation of a Hammerstein system . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3 Visual example showing the size of the Volterra kernels for a memory length
of 4 samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.4 A CAD rendering of the sensor + monitoring station (left) and a rendering
of the sample container (right) – Reproduced with permission from [1] (left)
and [3] (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.1 A visualisation of xT2’s structure. Here it can be seen that the memory length
being used for both time lags is 3, and that there are 4 windows. This will
enable the prediction of four data points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2 Shows the training time vs memory length for the program, both when the
GPU is used and when the CPU is being used exclusively. . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3 Two Layer Perceptron Model. By convention the input layer is known as layer
0. Image taken from Medium AI [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.4 Theleftfigureshowstheprobabilitydistributionofthegeneratedinputsignal.
The right figure shows the power spectrum of the generated input. . . . . . . 31
3.5 Plot showing the actual output vs the predicted output of the system, when
using the model found with the MLP-Volterra code. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.6 The left plot shows the predicted impulse response of the system. The second
plot shows the predicted second order kernel. These are for the MLP-Volterra
approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.7 Plot showing the actual output vs the predicted output of the system, when
using the model found with the Tensor based approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.8 The left plot shows the predicted impulse response of the system. The second
plot shows the predicted second order kernel. These are for the Tensor approach. 33
3.9 Bode plot of the transfer function generated from the impulse response of the
tensor approach code’s output model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.1 The difference between a given h2 kernel and the initial (0thdataset kernel)
has been computed for a series of kernels spaced apart by 20 datasets (10
minutes). The kernels used for the subtraction were found using the ‘Tensor’
approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
9
---PAGE BREAK---
5.1 Image of the well plate used for the experiments. The image is taken from
the supplier website [30]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2 Impedance measurement PCB. Connects to a reference resistor and an off-
board voltage generator using SMA connectors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3 Isometric view of the portable computation platform (left). Side view of the
portable computation platform (right). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.4 Image of the revised experimental set up. This was placed on top of a small
table and placed within the incubator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.5 Image of the final set up. Here the computation platform is simplified due
to no longer requiring the Raspberry Pi 5 and the hard drive. The set up is
attached to the side of the incubator walls to allow for other samples to fit
within the incubator. The devices connect to a desktop situated external to,
but beside the incubator (not shown). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.6 Layout of sugar solutions used in the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.7 Well plate showing the sugar-bacteria solutions after the experiment. . . . . 45
5.8 Discolouration and accumulation on the electrodes on the PCB after running
the experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.9 3D printed piece that clamps and aligns the well plate and PCB together for
more reliable impedance data for future experiments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.10 Future experiment set up. The PCB is clamped with washers to stay in place. 47
10
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 1
Introduction
Monitoring bacterial and fungal growth is a necessary task for many industries. From
wastewater management, to milk production and biological research, it is crucial to de-
tect the presence of unwanted bacteria, or the purposeful growth of microbes in a controlled
environment. This a time-intensive process which requires researchers to repeatedly remove
plates containing bacteria from an incubator, sample the plates, and then use some form of
automatic counting device to identify the bacteria count. One common approach is to use
a spectrophotometer, which provides a measure of the density of the bacteria, which can be
converted to a count by utilising a standard curve. This is tedious and there exists cases
where the use of a spectrophotometer is not possible.
A potential solution to this problem is the use of an electrochemical sensor which can
continuously monitor a solution and model its electrochemical behaviour. This sensor can be
used to assess bacterial growth and infer properties of the medium. Several versions of such
a sensor have been built and used to acquire data for: milk, water, soy milk, salt solutions
and an experimental bioreactor, using Wiener system analysis and the Randles equivalent
circuit [1] [2]. However, the full dynamic modelling of the media proves to be a complicated
challenge, duetothenonlinearnatureoftheimpedanceresponseofthesolutionwhenexcited
with a large stochastic voltage. The use of a black box Volterra series model to represent the
liquid shows promise due to its ability to capture the nonlinearities exhibited by the liquid
and the ability to infer key information from the Volterra kernels of the model, since they
encapsulate the idle state of the liquid, its impulse response and its nonlinear dynamics.
Once the Volterra series representation of a system and its variation over time is found,
the kernels can be used as a template for evaluating the condition of different liquids in
industrial or research settings.
1.0.1 Project Scope
The goal of this project is to develop a sensor that can model the electrochemical behaviour
ofaliquidmediumusingaVolterraseriesrepresentation. Thisrepresentationanditschanges
over time can be verified in a laboratory setting to determine a library of template kernels
which can later be used in comparison to real time modelling completed on liquid samples
in an industrial or research setting.
The devices used in real-time industrial applications will differ from the devices built to
11
---PAGE BREAK---
extract the initial/baseline set of kernels. This is due to cost, size and other constraints that
may be placed on the device, highly dependant on the application for which it is being used
[1] [3]. The primary objective of this project is the nonlinear modeling required to extract
the template kernels. Additionally, this project includes studying the efficacy of the sensor
for monitoring bacterial growth in milk and designing a version of the sensor to monitor the
growth rate of bacteria ( K. Xylinus ) when fed various sugars, using Volterra kernels as well
as linear models.
12
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 2
Background
2.1 System Identification
System identification is the process of modelling a system from a set of data input to the
system and the corresponding output data. The use of statistical methods allow the compu-
tation of a general representation of the system which allows the simulation of the system’s
response to arbitrary inputs.
There are many characteristics of a system, which determine the methods used to model
them. For example, a static(otherwise known as memoryless ) system is one whose output
responseisentirelydeterminedbytheinput. Anexampleofsuchasystemisapurelyresistive
circuit. If the input to the circuit is the current and the observed output is the voltage drop
across the circuit, the system will obey Ohm’s law: V=IR, where R is the total equivalent
resistance of the system, I is the total current through the circuit, and V is the voltage drop.
Assuming negligible parasitic capacitances and changes in resistance due to temperature, the
system will always output the same voltage drop for a given input current, with no influence
from past or future values on the input current [4].
Conversely, a dynamic system is the opposite. Here, the output of a system not only
depends on the present input into it, but also on past or future inputs into the system. For
example, a circuit containing a capacitor exhibits dynamic properties. The displacement
current ‘through’ a capacitor can be described as I(t) =CdV(t)
dt, where C is the capacitance
and V is the voltage drop across the capacitor. If the current is the input into the system,
and the voltage drop across the capacitor is the output, the relationship can be described
by:V(t) =1
CRt
−∞I(τ)dτ. Here it can be seen that the voltage drop is a function of the
input current for all time less than or equal to the current moment, t. Dynamic systems can
also incorporate a delayed time effect, whereas static models will respond instantaneously to
any change in the input.
Another property of a system to consider is whether or not it is time-invariant . A
time-invariant system is one which satisfies the requirement that: ∀δ:f(x(t+δ)) =y(t+δ),
where x(t) describes the input to a system at time t, y(t) is the output of the system at time
t and f is a function mapping the input of the system to the output. This means that there
is no explicit time dependence in the system’s function f, except the time dependence of x(t).
This means that the start time at which the system is excited is not important. Whether
13
---PAGE BREAK---
the system is perturbed in the morning or at night, there is no change in its behaviour.
By extension, a time-varying system is one where the starting time of an input affects
the response of the system. An example of these are systems which are strongly affected
by environmental conditions. For example, dropping a near mass-less object from high
altitude and measuring its horizontal trajectory is likely to be affected by the wind, and other
atmospheric conditions not just related to the altitude at which the object is dropped, hence
the time at which the drop occurs is important and must be encapsulated into the system
model. Note that the use of a near mass-less object is simply to convey that the environment
strongly affects the outcome of dropping the mass. In most cases if the conditions provide
very little/negligible effect on the output of the system, the system is assumed as time-
invariant for simplicity.
It is also important to understand if a system is linear. Linear systems scale in well-
defined ways that make the analysis of these systems notably simpler than the modelling of
nonlinear systems. Linear systems are common place and the methodology used to identify
these are extremely powerful. However, not all systems can be adequately modelled as such
and it is therefore required to switch to more nuanced methods of system identification. The
following section aims to describe the common approaches for linear and nonlinear system
identification and will serve to motivate the use of the Volterra series representation for
modelling within this project.
2.1.1 Linear System Identification
A system is linear if and only if it satisfies the superposition principle. This means that for
a function H, which maps the input of a system to the output of the system (within the time
domain), H(x(t)) =y(t), scaling the input signal by a constant simply results in the scaling
of the system response, by the same constant: H(kx(t)) = ky(t). It also means that for a
linear combination of input signals into the system, the output of the system is simply the
same linear combination of the individual responses for each of the inputs. This is expressed
as:H(ax1(t) +bx2(t)) =ay1(t) +by2(t)where H(x1(t)) =y1(t)andH(x2(t)) =y2(t).
Due to this fact, modelling a linear system is relatively simple. By supplying a Dirac
delta function as input to a linear system, the observed output of the system can be found.
This output is known as the ‘impulse response’ of the system h(t). This response is all
that is needed to model a system. By performing the convolution of an input signal x(t)
with the impulse response, the output of the system y(t) can be found. The continuous
convolution operation is defined as follows: (x∗h)(t) =R∞
−∞x(τ)h(t−τ)dτ. Whilst this can
be generalised for time varying systems, the focus of the next paragraph is to explain how
the impulse response for a linear time-invariant (LTI) fully describes the system to build
intuition.
For this, we recognise that each value of the signal x(t)can simply be treated as a
time shifted and scaled version of the Dirac delta function. Every value within the input
signal x(t) is now a function, that spans infinite time. For example, x1(t)is the function
which represents the contribution of the first sample to the input across all time. From this
it can be seen that x1(t)is 0 for all times not equal to t1, the time at which the first sample
is applied to the system in x(t). This extends to the rest of the input samples, where the
contribution of xncan be modelled as a function of value 0 for all time t, not equal to tn.
14
---PAGE BREAK---
Therefore, Xn(t) =xn∗δ(t−tn), where Xnis the contribution function of the nthsample
in the input signal x(t), xnis the value of the nthinput sample, and tnis the time at which
this nthsample occurs. By adding up these functions, the original input signal x(t) is made.
Since superposition states that the output of a sum of inputs is simply the sum of
the outputs for each particular input, the output of the model can therefore be described
by the sum of the outputs due to each of these shifted and scaled Dirac delta functions,
which represent the input sample values. This means that the output of the entire signal x
is simply the sums of the impulse response functions for all of the values within x.
By summing these individual outputs, we observe that the system’s output is simply the
convolution between x(t) and the impulse response.
Another option is to use a step function as input to the system.The relationship between
this and the impulse response is well known and so a step response can also be used to
represent systems. However, these signals, whilst intuitive, are difficult to replicate in the
real world and other input signals are typically preferred for modelling physical systems.
An example of this is the use of a swept sine waves as input into a complicated physical
system. For an input such as this, the analysis is also completed in the frequency domain
(via Laplace transforms) [5].
From this, it can be seen that the path to identifying a linear system is well defined
and is a computationally tractable problem. It is advantageous to model systems as linear
time-invariant (LTI) when possible. However, it is not uncommon for real world systems
to stray from linear behaviour. In this case, to accurately model the system, nonlinearities
must be accounted for.
2.1.2 Nonlinear System Identification
Wiener Model Analysis
One approach to modelling nonlinear systems is to split the system into two components:
a linear dynamic sub-system which has an impulse response h( τ) and a static nonlinear
component n(t) [6].
A signal x(t) which is inputted into the system is modified by the linear impulse response
h(τ) before being ‘passed into’ the static nonlinearity as an internal signal u(t). This type
of system is also referred to as an LN system, since it is composed of a linear sub-system
followed by a nonlinear one.
Figure 2.1: Block diagram representation of a Wiener system
To identify a system using this representation, h( τ) and n(u) need to be found.
15
---PAGE BREAK---
To do this, Bussgang’s Theorem is utilised [7] [8]. This theorem states, that for a
zero-mean Gaussian input signal x(t), the output signal of the system y(t) and an arbitrary
Gaussian signal z(t), the following is true:
Cxz(τ) =kCyz(τ), (2.1)
where Cxz(τ)is the cross-correlation function between x(t)and the arbitrary function z(t),
Cyz(τ)is the cross-correlation between y(t)andz(t)andkis a constant.
Note that the system in question must be static and nonlinear. This result will be used to
show how h(τ)andn(u)can be computed. As can be seen from Figure 2.1, the input to
the nonlinear block is a signal u(t). Therefore u∗n=y, where the ∗operator represents
convolution. From Bussgang’s theorem we also know that Cux=αCyx. Here the ‘arbitrary
Gaussian signal’ used is the input to the system. We also know that x∗h=uand therefore
Cxx∗h=Cux, which holds true for linear systems. Since Cxx∗h=Cux=αCyxwe now
have a relationship between the auto-correlation of the known input to the system and the
cross-correlation between the system’s input and output, both of which are known. As a
result, the impulse response function h( τ) can be found to be h(τ) =Cxx×αCyxwhere the
×operator represents deconvolution. Whilst the value of αis unknown a value can be
imposed and the nonlinear block can be modified to account for this constant scaling. Now
that h( τ) is known, u can be found by convolving h( τ) with x(t) and this result can then be
deconvolved with y(t) to find the static nonlinearity n. An iterative least squares regression
algorithm can then be used to parameterise h and n. The system has now been identified.
Hammerstein Model Analysis
Another approach for modelling nonlinear systems is with the Hammerstein representation.
This is similar to the Wiener system model since it splits the system into a dynamic linear
component and a static nonlinear component. However, in this model, the input of the
system first passes through the static nonlinearity before this result is passed into the
linear sub-system [9]. This type of system is also referred to as an NL system, since it is
composed of a nonlinear sub-system followed by a linear one.
Figure 2.2: Block diagram representation of a Hammerstein system
To identify a system, by solving for n(x) and h(u), Bussgang’s Theorem can be used again.
In this case we can see that Cxx=αCux, where the arbitrary signal being used is also x(t).
It can also be seen that Y=h∗u(* again represents convolution), and since we are
describing the linear component: Cxy=h∗Cxu. Combining this with the previous equation
16
---PAGE BREAK---
we see that Cxy=h∗1
αCxx. By assume a value for alpha, and by performing the
deconvolution between the auto-correlation of x(t) and the cross-correlation between x(t)
and y(t), h( τ) is found. This can be deconvolved with y(t) to find u(t), and then u(t) can
be deconvolved with x(t) to find n(x). After parameterising n(x) and h( τ), the system has
been identified.
Both the Wiener and Hammerstein models are capable of representing nonlinear
systems and are computationally efficient in comparison to other methods. However, these
representations and even NLN or LNL models, which are simply combinations of Wiener
and Hammerstein models, are unable to model dynamic nonlinearities, which can
incorporate non-linear effects at time lags. This makes them poorly suited for the purposes
of this project due to the dynamic nonlinear behaviour exhibited by the media used [2] [1].
Volterra Model Analysis
The Volterra series is an expansion that is used to approximate functions, similar to the
Taylor series [10] [11]. However, one key difference is that the Volterra series is able to
approximate systems with memory, where the output at a given time t, can depend on the
system’s output at all times less than t [12]. It is a non-parametric model which can model
nonlinear systems of arbitrary polynomial order. The formula for the discrete time Volterra
Series approximation of a system is:
y[n] =h0+MX
m1=0h1[m1]x[n−m1] +MX
m2=0MX
m1=0h2[m1, m 2]x[n−m1]x[n−m2] +. . . .
This shows the expansion up to the second order. The variables h0toh2are the first three
Volterra kernels which represent the system. The zeroth order kernel h0, represents the
constant bias in the system, h1represents the linear impulse response of the system and h2
represents the quadratic response of the system. For the purposes of the sensor, only these
three kernels need to be identified to model the liquid. Here M refers to the memory of the
system, which specifies the number of previous input data points used to predict the
current output sample. The size of M directly affects the size of the kernels. The figure
below illustrates this:
Figure 2.3: Visual example showing the size of the Volterra kernels for a memory length of
4 samples.
17
---PAGE BREAK---
Here, h0is a single value, h1is a column vector of length M and h2is aM×Mmatrix.
The grey boxes represent non-zero values, whilst the white boxes represent zeros. When
calculating the second order kernel, the sum of hijandhjiwill approach some constant k.
It is therefore equivalent to set one of these to k and force the other element to be 0. This
reduces the number of parameters used by the model.
The Volterra series is an extremely powerful tool for modelling nonlinear systems. Not
only is it able to model dynamic nonlinearities, it also imposes no restrictions on the
probability distribution of the input signal into the system. This is not the case for
Hammerstein and Wiener systems, which require Gaussian input signals to leverage
Bussgang’s theorem, for the initial identification of the system. It is therefore the choice of
nonlinear model used in this project.
Despite this, the Volterra series model of a system is not without flaws. As the
complexity of the system being modelled increases, higher order kernels and longer memory
are required to model the system’s dynamics. This results in a polynomial growth in the
number of parameters used to represent the system, which in turn requires longer input
data, to prevent over-fitting. This results in extremely long memory and computationally
intensive procedures required to identify the Volterra kernels, usually limiting the series
expansion to the first non-trivial nonlinear kernel, which is typically the second or third
order kernel, depending on the system. This phenomena is also known as the curse of
dimensionality [13].
Evaluating Models
The Variance Accounted For (VAF) metric is a commonly used measure to evaluate the
performance of a dynamic system model by comparing the predicted output of the model
to the actual output of the system. It is defined as the percentage of the output variance
that is explained by the model. A higher VAF value indicates a better model fit. The VAF
is calculated using the following formula:
VAF =
1−Var(y−ˆy)
Var(y)
×100% ,
where yis the actual output, ˆyis the predicted output, and Var (·)denotes the statistical
variance. The VAF value ranges up to a maximal 100%, which indicates a perfect fit. This
metric will be used to evaluate the performance of the Volterra series models.
18
---PAGE BREAK---
2.2 Electrochemical Sensor
The Electrochemical sensor of this project works by applying a stochastic voltage between
two electrodes, submerged in the medium of study. This results in current flow through the
medium, between the electrodes. By observing the current output due to the stochastic
voltage signal, the impedance of the medium and how it changes over time can be
identified. Conversely, as is done within this project, by treating the current as the input of
the system and the voltage across the medium as the output, the admittance of the
medium is observed and modelled. Since the impedance and admittance are reciprocals of
each other, the information captured by monitoring these is equivalent.
An existing electrochemical sensor and monitoring station have been built by my
project advisor, Michael Aling.
Figure 2.4: A CAD rendering of the sensor + monitoring station (left) and a rendering of
the sample container (right) – Reproduced with permission from [1] (left) and [3] (right).
The monitoring station refers to the sensor alongside the other components needed to
maintain a constant temperature for experiments. This station in Figure 2.4 has nine
containers which are filled with the medium(s) being studied. The electrodes protrude from
the base of the containers and are connected to the function generator and oscilloscope
instruments at their base. Since the impedance of the medium is highly temperature
dependent, radiators and a thermoelectric system have been integrated into the monitoring
station to regulate the temperature for experiments.
This sensor configuration has been built and used to collect data on a series of liquids
and was used to gather data on milk (described in greater detail in chapter 4) . Whilst the
sensor is able to gather data which can be passed into the Volterra Series identification
software for this project, the configuration remains large, making it difficult to carry and
move. This is because it has incorporated temperature control. However, the end-use
sensors are designed to be handheld and will not require this [2]. The form factor of the
sensor will depend on the application for its intended use.
19
---PAGE BREAK---
2.2.1 Sensor Applications
Milk Analysis
One of the wide range of applications for the sensor is modeling and monitoring the
electrochemical properties of milk. By understanding the electrochemical behavior of milk,
we can form a ‘standard’ template that reflects the expected behavior of clean, safe milk.
The sensor can then be used in a production or packaging environment to monitor milk
and compare its properties to the standard results. This allows for the identification of
bulk composition changes and biofilm formation, which can indicate spoilage or
contamination [14] [15] [16].
Additionally, by monitoring the change in impedance of the milk, it is possible to
attribute deviations from the expected Volterra kernels to the presence of bacteria within
the milk. Milk can contain various bacteria, such as Salmonella, Escherichia coli (E. coli),
Staphylococcus aureus , andListeria [17] [18]. The presence of these bacteria can lead to
significant health risks if not detected and subsequently ingested.
One common cause of bacterial contamination in milk is the health of the cows,
specifically the presence of subclinical mastitis. Subclinical mastitis is an infection of a
cow’s udder. Unlike clinical mastitis which shows clear signs such as raw, swollen udders
and clots in the milk, there are no visual symptoms for subclinical mastitis. With the lack
of visual symptoms and the fact that the infection can be up to twenty times more
prevalent than clinical mastitis, it is imperative that effective measures are put in place to
identify and cure the infection as fast as possible [19] [20] [21].
Currently, one method to detect subclinical mastitis is by measuring the somatic cell
count (SCC) of the milk. A higher SCC indicates a higher likelihood of infection, but this
method is not foolproof and often requires additional culture tests to confirm the presence
of bacteria [22] [23]. This process is time-consuming and expensive.
After the full development of the sensor, it should be able to be placed in a container of
milk and provide rapid detection of infection due to changes in the biochemical
composition of the milk. This rapid detection can be used to prevent cross-contamination
of the milk and therefore reduces the amount that has to be discarded. It can also help
save money and reduce the risk of supplying contaminated milk, thereby increasing
consumer safety. Additionally, it enables the rapid treatment of cows, reducing the
duration of their suffering before a diagnosis is made.
Well Plate Bacteria Monitoring
Another promising application of the sensor is in studying the doubling rate of bacteria
when fed different sugars. Typically, glucose is used in bacterial growth experiments.
However, there are more cost-effective sugars available that could result in similar growth
curves to that of Glucose based solutions, but at a fraction of the price. This has been an
area of research for Dr. Cathy Hogan of the MIT BioInstrumentation Lab, who proposed
this application for the electrochemical sensor.
When determining the doubling rate of bacteria (for a given solution), the bacteria is
placed in a sugar solution and left to incubate at 29 °C. After a set duration of time, a
researcher has to remove the plate holding the bacteria from the incubator, take an aliquot
20
---PAGE BREAK---
of the sample and then use a device such as a spectrophotometer, to determine a metric
which can then be used to identify the population of bacteria given some standard curves.
The sample can then be returned to the incubator and this process is repeated. By
tracking the population repeatedly after set intervals, this can be plotted to ascertain the
doubling rate of the bacteria within the used solution. This is inherently laborious and is a
method that does not always work.
For example, with K. Xylinus , a particular strain of bacteria, when it grows in the
presence of sugar, a solid pellicle forms on the surface of the solution. This means that a
spectrophotometer cannot be used to identify the population of the bacteria. Furthermore,
this strain of bacteria is aerobic, meaning that the bacteria require oxygen. For this reason,
the bacteria remain on top of the pellicle. By attempting to take a sample of the solution
and disturbing the pellicle layer, the sample would be rendered useless and another sample
would have to be used. This poses a problem for researchers and is an example of where
the electrochemical sensor can be used.
By modifying the sensor to fit into a 6x4 well plate, it can be used to monitor the
impedance of the solution and from the changes in this, infer the growth of bacteria. It
may therefore be able to estimate the doubling rate of bacteria within the wells. This
modification automates the process, eliminating the need for researcher intervention during
the incubation period and by passes the need for plate counting methods. The pellicle can
grow around the sensor’s electrodes, allowing continuous monitoring without discarding
samples. With this, it could therefore be possible to monitor the doubling rate of the
bacteria, even with the presence of the pellicles and the sensor could then be used to
identify alternative sugars to Glucose that lead to rapid bacterial growth. One such
potential alternative is ‘corn steep liquor’. This is a by-product of the wet-milling of corn,
and is extremely cheap. If a sugar such as this, where to provide fruitful results, the cost of
running experiments could be significantly decreased, and another use could be found for,
what is considered a waste product.
A key aspect of this project has been the initial development of the well-plate sensor’s
form factor, as well as preliminary experimentation to determine the viability of this
concept.
21
---PAGE BREAK---
22
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 3
Volterra Series for Electrochemical
System Analysis
There are a variety of ways in which the Volterra kernels of a system can be determined
[24] [25]. For this research, two different algorithms were developed for this task. One
approach represents the data as a matrix and a tensor for optimised data prediction,
whereas the second approach transforms a neural network into the Volterra kernels,
leveraging existing optimisations for machine learning libraries.
3.0.1 Tensor Approach
The Tensor approach starts with a randomly initialised set of kernels: A single random
value for h0, a random vector of length M for h1and a random lower triangular (M×M)
matrix for h2. Here and through the rest of the paper, M will refer to the memory length
being utilised. The kernels are then used to predict the output of the system. This
predicted output is then compared with the actual system output, using a Mean Square
Error (MSE) loss function and the program utilises gradient descent to modify each value
within the kernels to minimise this loss function. The Adamoptimiser is used to compute
adaptive learning rates for each parameter. In addition to this, L2 regularisation is used to
encourage the kernel values to spread out more evenly. Other details, such as early exiting,
detecting early convergence of the gradient descent etc, can be seen in the code, added to
the appendix.
To predict the output of the system from a set of Volterra Kernels, the following
formula can be utilised:
y[n] =h0+MX
m1=0h1[m1]x[n−m1] +MX
m2=0MX
m1=0h2[m1, m 2]x[n−m1]x[n−m2] +. . . .
This predicts the nthoutput data point. This must be computed for each output data
point and must be performed during every iteration of the algorithm, to pass into the loss
function and optimise. This is a complicated calculation which must be performed millions
of times per execution of the program. To speed up the execution of the algorithm, matrix
and tensor operations, which have been optimised for rapid computation, can be used. The
23
---PAGE BREAK---
tensors are therefore structures that have been created to allow the rapid computation of
the predicted output during each iteration of the gradient descent.
For this approach, we consider the predicted output from each kernel individually and
sum their contribution at the end to generate the predicted output. Since h0is a constant
it is simply added to each output data point to shift them. In practice this should be 0 for
the systems being dealt with, although due to the numerical computation this may drift
from this value slightly. When focusing on the linear response of the system, this can be
found by focusing on the predicted output when using h1. To do this we can consider a
small example.
Consider an input data tensor xT1, where each row represents a window of the input
signal with a specified memory length. Each row holds M points of the input signal, and
each row is simply a shifted version of the previous row. The rows also get reversed. This is
an implementation choice to keep in line with Hunter and Spanbauer [26]. The first-order
kernel h1is a vector containing the weights associated with each memory sample.
LetxT1be a tensor of shape [n, M ], where nis the number of windows and Mis the
memory length. The kernel h1is a vector of length M. The goal is to compute the
contribution of the first-order kernel to the output,
xT1 =
x11x12··· x1M
x21x22··· x2M
............
xN1xN2···xNM
,h1=
h1
h2
...
hM
. (3.1)
First, perform the element-wise multiplication between each row of xT1and the vector h1.
This yields another tensor of the same shape as xT1, which is:
xT1⊙h1=
x11h1x12h2··· x1MhM
x21h1x22h2··· x2MhM
............
xN1h1xN2h2···xNMhM
. (3.2)
Next, by summing each row to obtain a single value per row, the resultant vector y1of
length n, is the sum of the products for the corresponding window,
y1=
PM
j=1x1jhjPM
j=1x2jhj
...PM
j=1xNjhj
. (3.3)
In the context of the Volterra model, y1represents the contribution of the first order
kernel to the output. From this it can be see that the use of a matrix xT1can allow for
the linear prediction for the entire signal at once.
24
---PAGE BREAK---
For a given input signal of length N, the predicted output is of length n=N−M+ 1.
This is because M previous samples are needed to generate each output data point. This
notation will be re-used throughout the paper.
Similar to this, a tensor xT2can be used to compute the contribution of the second
order kernel to the output. The computation of this contribution involves two separate
time lags, alongside the h2matrix. To represent this in a way that allows the prediction of
the entire output signal at once, a tensor can be used. This tensor xT2hasnlayers, each
of size M×M. The elements of the tensor are denoted as xijkwhere iandjare the row
and column indices of each matrix, and kis the layer index.
Figure 3.1: A visualisation of xT2’s structure. Here it can be seen that the memory length
being used for both time lags is 3, and that there are 4 windows. This will enable the
prediction of four data points.
Each layer of xT2is a lower triangular matrix. The elements of each layer are formed by
the outer products of the lagged input values (the same windows used to generate xT1).
Once the the outer product is found, the rows of the matrix and reversed and then the
columns of the matrix are reversed (keeping in line with Hunter and Spanbauer’s work).
The contribution of the second-order kernel to the output is computed by first
performing the element-wise multiplication of h2with each layer of xT2. Each element of
the layer can then be summed to collapse the layer into a scalar value, entirely analogous
to the use of xT1. This then results in a column vector of length n of the form:
y2 =
PM
i=1PM
j=1x1ix1jhijPM
i=1PM
j=1x2ix2jhij
...PM
i=1PM
j=1xNixNjhij
.
Now that the contributions due to each kernel are known, the vectors can be added to give
the predicted output and the algorithm can work as previously described.
25
---PAGE BREAK---
Memory Averaging and Stepping
As described in 2.1.2, the Volterra series representation of a system suffers from the curse
of dimensionality. To represent complicated systems, larger memory lengths must be
used.This is because the lowest frequency identifiable by the model is determined by the
length of the impulse response which corresponds to the memory length being used. A
higher memory length is needed to model a broader frequency spectrum.
However, for a system utilising the first 3 kernels, the number of parameters used by
the model is1
2M2+3
2M+ 1. Increasing the memory length can rapidly result in
over-parametrisation and can lead to a set of kernels from which realistic electrochemical
properties cannot be inferred. To prevent this it is good to ensure that the number of
parameters used by the model remains strictly less than 10% of the input signal length.
For this to be true, the program requires extremely long input signals which does not suit
the tensor approach. xT1 and xT2 have dimensions [(N−M+ 1)×M]and
[M×M×(N−M+ 1)]respectively. A polynomial increase in the number of parameters
in the model results in a required polynomial increase in the length of the input signal,
with respect to the memory length used. This then results in extremely large xT1 and xT2
structures, making it difficult to run the program on systems with low/moderate memory.
The required memory length to identify a specific minimum frequency is:
M=Sampling Frequency
Minimum Identifiable Frequency.
However, this implictly assumes that when generating ‘windows’ of previous data points,
these data points are consecutive in the signal. However, by spacing out the points used to
represent the system memory, for the same number of points, a larger amount of time can
be represented by the system memory. This way lower frequencies can be observed by the
model by simply increasing the spacing between memory points as opposed to increasing
the length of the memory. The formula for the minimum memory length required would
therefore become:
M=Sampling Frequency
Minimum Identifiable Frequency×1
S.
S is the spacing factor, which corresponds to the number of data points in between the
points used by the memory. If every 5th point is used for the memory, the memory length
can decrease by a factor of 5, or for the same memory length, the minimum identifiable
frequency decreases by a factor of 5.
To allow the skipped input values to still influence the memory window, an averaging
effect was incorporated into the program. This means that the data point included in
memory is averaged with the ones that get skipped after it. Suppose we have an input
signal and decide to use a memory length M= 5with a step size of 2. This means that
each memory window will include 5 data points, but spans the same amount of time as 10
points in the original input signal. The step size of 2 implies that we select every second
data point to include in the memory window. For example, with a step size of 1, a regular
memory window would be [x1, x2, x3, x4, x5]. However, with a step size of 2, the memory
26
---PAGE BREAK---
window would be [x1, x3, x5, x7, x9], where xirepresents the ithdata point in the input
signal x.
To ensure that the data points excluded by the step size still influence the memory
window, an averaging effect can be applied. This means that each included data point in
the memory window is an average of the skipped data points and the preceding value in
the memory window. For instance, with a step size of 2 and averaging, the resulting
memory window becomes:
x1+x2
2,x3+x4
2,x5+x6
2,x7+x8
2,x9+x10
2
.
This approach allows the use of spacing to avoid having to increase the memory length
by drastic amounts, whilst still enabling skipped values to influence the memory window.
GPU utilisation
To enhance the performance of the program, particularly in terms of execution speed, the
incorporation of GPU acceleration was explored. By leveraging the parallel processing
capabilities of GPUs, a significant reduction in training time was achieved. This
improvement is crucial for handling large input signals, which is a requirement for the
complex systems being studied.
To test the difference in speed between the CPU and GPU, the time taken for the
program to find a set of kernels was monitored. The program was given a 10,000 sample
input signal and was ran for a range of memory lengths varying from 2 to 32 samples. This
was repeated and averaged over 5 trials. The CPU based code took a total of 400 minutes
to execute. This is an extremely long time, especially considering that when testing the
code on real experiment data, the input will be much larger than 10,000 samples. Faster
execution is therefore needed. By modifying the code to utilise the GPU, the execution
time drastically dropped by a factor of 11 to 35 minutes. The GPU used is an NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4060 and the CPU used is an intel i7-12700H.
Figure 3.2: Shows the training time vs memory length for the program, both when the GPU
is used and when the CPU is being used exclusively.
27
---PAGE BREAK---
From the graph it can be seen that the training time for the code utilising the GPU
remains relatively constant as memory length increases, whilst the CPU based code is
rapidly increasing, meaning that an even bigger speed increase can be expected for a larger
input signal and higher memory length.
Batch Processing
Due to the drastic increase in input signal length required for a small change in memory
length, the step and averaging feature was introduced into the program. However, there is
a noticeable decline in the VAF of the Volterra model as the step size increases. Whilst the
step size feature can help reduce the number of parameters required by the program,
iteration must be done when modelling a system to establish a trade off between the
number of parameters used and the final VAF. It is therefore still important to use a long
input signal for the program. Because of this, batch processing capabilities were
incorporated into the kernel identification software. As opposed to storing the entirety of
xT1 and xT2 on the GPU, the program is able to dynamically check the available GPU
memory, and determine the largest possible batch of the tensors that can be stored on the
GPU. A generator is then used to return the batches, allowing the program to remove and
add these batches to the GPU sequentially. This allows segments of the output to be
computed, and these segments can then be combined to form the entire output.
Since GPUs are expensive and are often lower in memory than the CPU on the same
computer, this has the benefit of leveraging the memory on the CPU and having that be
the limiting factor with regards to the size of the tensors, as opposed to the smaller GPU
memory.
Whilst, this works, the repeated transfer of data to and from the GPU as well as the
process of combining the segments of the output together results in a significant increase in
the execution time of the program. It therefore remains a recommendation to run this
program on computers that have GPUs with a minimum memory of 24 GB. This allows
the use of input signals approximately 150,000 samples long with a memory length of 200.
28
---PAGE BREAK---
3.0.2 Multi-Layer Perceptron Volterra Approach
The Multi-Layer Perceptron Volterra (MLP-Volterra) approach to determining the Volterra
kernels leverages the power and flexibility of deep learning techniques. By using
pre-existing optimisations and transformations commonly used in neural networks, this
method aims to efficiently and accurately identify the Volterra kernels.
In 1994 it was found that the use of a two layer Perceptron network was equivalent to
the Volterra series [27]. It is therefore possible to utilise this network to map an input
signal to an output signal and transform the weights of the neurons within the network
into a set of Volterra kernels.
Figure 3.3: Two Layer Perceptron Model. By convention the input layer is known as layer
0. Image taken from Medium AI [28].
To model the Volterra series using an MLP, the input data must be parsed into a suitable
format. This involves creating overlapping windows of the input signal, each of length M.
Each window is then used to predict the corresponding output. This approach ensures that
the network can capture the influence of past inputs on the current output.
Given an input signal {x1, x2, x3, . . . , x N}and a memory length M:
•The first window is [x1, x2, x3, . . . , x M]and the network predicts yM.
•The second window is [x2, x3, x4, . . . , x M+1]and the network predicts yM+1.
This means that the input layer consists of M neurons. The activation function for these
neurons is the linear function which simply returns the input.
The data points are then passed into the hidden layer. Here the hidden layer performs the
following operation:
opi=σi 
bi+NX
j=0wjiu(t−j)!
, (3.4)
where opiis the output of the ithneuron in the layer, σiis the activation function applied
to the ithneuron, biis the bias term for the ithneuron,PN
j=0is the summation over the
29
---PAGE BREAK---
pastNtime steps, wjiis the weight associated with the connection between the jthinput
and the ithneuron and u(t−j)is the input signal at time (t−j).
The activation function used in the program was the tanhfunction. This is due to this
function being used and documented to accurately help identify Volterra kernels [27].
However, other activation functions can be used and may be worth investigating.
Once the model is trained, the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) parameters can be
transformed into a set of kernels. These are given by:
h0=LX
i=1cia0i, (3.5)
h1(j) =LX
i=1cia1iwji, (3.6)
h2(j, k) =LX
i=1cia2iwjiwki, (3.7)
where ciis the weight of the connection between the i-th hidden layer neuron and the
single output neuron, a0i, a1i, a2iare the transform coefficients relating to the activation
function used, wji, wkiare the weights of the connections between the j-th and k-th inputs
and the i-th hidden layer neuron and Lis the number of neurons in the hidden layer. This
can be changed and tested to give a good model.
By considering the Taylors series equivalent of the activation function, a polynomial
representation of the output function can be found. This means that the output of each
hidden neuron is a polynomial in terms of the input time series data. The coefficients of
these outputs are the transform coefficients.
To find the transform coefficients, the Taylor series expansion of tanh(x) , around the
node’s bias value can be found. This yields the result:
aji=1
jtanh(j)(bi), (3.8)
where tanh(j)(x)is the jthderivative of tanh( x).
This is similar in principle to the tensor approach. A windowed representation of the data
is needed (xT1), gradient descent is implemented to optimise model parameters alongside
an Adam optimiser and an MSE loss function. However, the critical difference is that the
parameters are initially in the form of weights for a MLP model and later transformed to
the Volterra kernels. This allows faster execution of the program and prevents the need
to create an xT2 tensor, which posed a significant memory overhead that was unreasonable
for most computers. This version of the program has been shown to run approximately 4
times faster than the Tensor generation approach, across a wide range of tests.
30
---PAGE BREAK---
3.0.3 Software Testing - Tungsten Filament Experiment
To validate the two programs, they were used to model a system previously analysed with
a Volterra model. This system is a tungsten filament lamp, where the
Voltage-Luminescence characteristics were analysed [26]. To do this, a stochastic voltage
signal is applied to a filament bulb. A photo-diode is placed 5mm away from the bulb and
the voltage across this is measured as the output of the system.
As is similar to the experiment completed in Span and Hunter’s ‘Coarse-Grained
Nonlinear System Identification’, a stochastic signal with a Gaussian distribution is used as
input to the system. This signal has a maximum frequency of 10Hz. A sampling frequency
of 750 Hz is used for recording data. A signal meeting these criteria was generated.
Figure 3.4: The left figure shows the probability distribution of the generated input signal.
The right figure shows the power spectrum of the generated input.
The signal is designed to have a mean of 0.85V to remain within the 0V - 1.7V input
voltage region which prevents saturation of the filament. The signal was also filtered using
a 5thorder low-pass Butterworth filter, to remove frequencies beyond 10 Hz.
For this experiment, the input signal was 210,000 samples long, covering a span of 280
seconds. When analysing the system with the MLP-Volterra approach, the identified
kernels were able to model the system with a VAF of 97.7%. This is with a memory length
of 200 samples and 1500 neurons in the hidden node.
Figure 3.5: Plot showing the actual output vs the predicted output of the system, when
using the model found with the MLP-Volterra code.
31
---PAGE BREAK---
Figure 3.6: The left plot shows the predicted impulse response of the system. The second
plot shows the predicted second order kernel. These are for the MLP-Volterra approach.
From the figure it can be seen that the second order kernel has a concentration of high
values corresponding to low lags in the upper left corner of the figure. There is a decrease
in the values of the kernel as the lags increase from zero. This is expected and indicates
that the code works as expected.
For the Tensor code, similar parameters were used. The same 210,000 sample input
signal is used and a memory length of 200 samples is also used. However, since this
program has the ability to incorporate steps, a step size of 4 is chosen. This allows the
lowest identifiable frequency in the generated model to reach 1 Hz, whereas the
MLP-Volterra code shown above, only accounted for frequencies at or above 3.75 Hz.
Figure 3.7: Plot showing the actual output vs the predicted output of the system, when
using the model found with the Tensor based approach.
32
---PAGE BREAK---
Figure 3.8: The left plot shows the predicted impulse response of the system. The second
plot shows the predicted second order kernel. These are for the Tensor approach.
The tensor approached achieved a 96.5% VAF. This is slightly lower than the VAF of the
MLP-Volterra code’s model. However, the second order kernel shows a much stronger
response than the MLP-Volterra model. This second order kernel also shows a strong
concentration of values at small lags (upper left corner of the kernel). However, this kernel
shows a regular striped pattern, which was not as present in the MLP-Volterra second
order kernel. This could be because the tensor code was able to account for frequencies as
low as 1 Hz, whereas the MLP-Volterra code’s minimum identifiable frequency was 3.75
Hz, which is a significant difference given that the input signal was purposefully filtered to
remove frequencies above 10 Hz.
One potential issue is the appearance of the impulse response. This appears to show
irregular behaviour where the amplitude of oscillations will increase, then decrease and so
on. This impulse response can be explored further by converting it into a transfer function.
Figure 3.9: Bode plot of the transfer function generated from the impulse response of the
tensor approach code’s output model.
33
---PAGE BREAK---
For the frequency range pertinent to the system (0 to 10 Hz), the bode plot looks as
expected. It therefore may not be the case that the impulse response is physically
unrealisable. However, it is worth noting the difference in the outputs of both programs.
Whilst the generated kernels appear to model the system, it is very easy for the
program to generate a set of kernels which do not accurately represent the physical system
being modelled. Both programs are extremely sensitive to the parameters used and can
produce vastly different results with slight changes to their values. It is therefore necessary
to trial a series of parameter combinations to find the best model for the system under
analysis. If there is prior knowledge about the system, the initial parameters can be
estimated and incremental modifications can be made to improve the model. However, for
systems with little known prior information, it may be necessary to perform a grid search
over the parameter space to identify the best combination of values.
34
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 4
Milk Impedance Analysis
By monitoring the change in electrochemical behaviour of the milk for an extended period
of time, it is possible to learn how the impedance of the milk varies as the milk spoils. This
will provide a template against which other milk samples can be compared. This not only
allows for a more accurate prediction as to when the milk will spoil, but can also be used
to infer the existence of hazardous bacteria within the milk. Identifying the change in
impedance due to unwanted bacteria within the milk is a future goal of the project. The
initial set of experiments set out to benchmark the behaviour of standard store bought
milk which is safe for consumption.
4.0.1 Experimental Procedure
To perform the experiment, the sensor and monitoring station developed by Michael Aling,
shown in Figure 2.4, was used. This setup has an Analog Discovery Digilent 2 used for each
container [29]. This is used to generate the stochastic voltage signal across the electrodes.
A thermocouple was also placed within each container to monitor the temperature of each
container as the experiment was running. The experiment procedure went as follows:
1. Sanitise the equipment with soap and water.
2. Perform a short leak test by ensuring there are no leaks with the liquid cooling and
via the holes in the containers, through which the electrodes protrude.
3. Sterlise the equipment further with a 70% ethanol solution, taking extra care to clean
ridges and the electrodes.
4. Fill the containers with 80g of milk. To do this, a sterilised beaker was filled with 30g
of milk and this was emptied into a container. Each container was first filled to 30g,
then this was repeated to ensure that all containers held 60g of the plain milk, before
finally adding the final 20g of milk to each container. After every 3 fills of the
containers, the milk carton was vigorously shaken to ensure a uniform mixing of the
milk, which tends to stratify over time.
5. Establish connections between the thermocouples, Digilent Discovery 2 devices and
the computer. And verify that the code is running as intended.
35
---PAGE BREAK---
6. Sterilise the thermocouples with alcohol and place in each container, making sure to
stay above the milk.
7. Seal the containers with the designed lids and let the experiment run.
The experiment was designed to run at 35◦C, since it is good for rapid bacterial growth.
Whilst the experiment can be conducted within the temperature range of -5◦C to 70◦C,
operating at the extremities of this range would test the propagation of heat or cold
tolerant bacteria specifically, which is not the purpose of this experiment. The station’s
thermoelectric coolers were utilised to maintain the 35◦C temperature for all of the
containers for the duration of the experiment.
4.0.2 Results
After running the experiment, for each of the nine containers in the sensor and monitoring
station, there were multiple datasets, each spanning a fixed duration of time. For the
results, one container was considered. Here the evolution of the kernels between the 0th
dataset up until the 100thdata set was monitored. Each dataset’s results were due to a
stochastic signal sampled at 100 Hz. The input signal for each dataset spanned 30 seconds,
resulting in an input length of 30000 samples. A subset of the results have been shown
below:
Figure 4.1: The difference between a given h2 kernel and the initial (0thdataset kernel) has
been computed for a series of kernels spaced apart by 20 datasets (10 minutes). The kernels
used for the subtraction were found using the ‘Tensor’ approach.
The impulse response has not been shown since it stays the same throughout the
experiment. The only noticeable difference in the models over time is observed in the
36
---PAGE BREAK---
second order kernel. From this it can be seen that there is a change in the kernels over
time. However, these changes are small in scale. There are local regions within the kernels
which remain having high values across the samples, and there is a faint pattern of the
kernel showing positive values along lines, parallel to the diagonal of the kernel.
Interpretation
These results appear to provide little information about the milk. This may be due to a
few reasons. The first, is due to the high voltages used, to access the nonlinear
electrochemical behaviour of the milk. By having a higher voltage across the electrodes,
the current density within the milk increases, leading to PH changes in the liquid. This can
result in the milk beginning to prematurely spoil.
The use of high voltages can also result in the milk curdling and the formation of
bubbles. These bubbles completely transform the expected impedance behaviour of the
system and can lead to results which are not reflective of the milk.
It therefore appears that, since curdling was observed, that the voltage signal used to
excite the milk had peak values which were too high, resulting in the tainting of the data.
To improve this further experimentation is needed. By determining the optimal signal
to supply to the milk that allows the system to exhibit nonlinear behaviour which can be
modelled, whilst avoiding the issues experienced at high voltages, more reliable data can be
extracted from the system for use with the kernel identification software.
37
---PAGE BREAK---
38
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 5
Sugar Solution Impedance Analysis
To monitor the growth of bacteria in the presence of different sugar solutions, a new form
factor for the sensor is needed. In this application, the sugar solution is placed in the wells
of a standard well plate, used in microbiological research, before the bacteria is introduced
and the plate is incubated for approximately 7 days. The new sensor design must therefore
be compact and must mate with the well plate, to allow it to be placed within the
incubator and continuously capture data.
5.0.1 Well Plate Sensor Design
The well plates used for experiments featured 24 wells and were arranged to have 4 rows of
6 wells.
Figure 5.1: Image of the well plate used for the experiments. The image is taken from the
supplier website [30].
The chosen design for the sensor was in the form factor of a PCB that can be placed on top
of the well plate. The PCB would contain electrodes which would align with the centers of
39
---PAGE BREAK---
the wells. The electrodes would have an applied potential difference across them due to the
other components on the PCB. Fortunately, a PCB designed to fit with the well plates had
already been created by Professor Ian Hunter and Dr. Serge Lafontaine, of the MIT
BioInstrumentation Laboratory. This PCB is shown below:
(a) Top view of the PCB
 (b) Bottom view of the PCB
Figure 5.2: Impedance measurement PCB. Connects to a reference resistor and an offboard
voltage generator using SMA connectors.
Quad relays are used to sequentially apply the voltage across a specific electrode pair. This
ensures that the impedance analysis can be performed on one well at a time, before the
stochastic voltage is iterated through the rest of the electrode pairs.
The left electrode of each pair (from the top view) is connected to the relays, which are
connected to the 8 x 2 holes along the border of the PCB. The rightmost electrode for each
electrode pair is connected to a reference resistor, which is connected to ground. This
reference resistor is connected on the top right of the PCB. The three groups of three gold
strips on the right of the board are populated with SMA connector heads, to plug to the
voltage generation device.
40
---PAGE BREAK---
5.0.2 Portable Computation Platform
To perform the experiment, it is necessary to build a portable computation platform that:
supplies the PCB with the stochastic voltage, sequences through the electrode pairs and
saves the data to some external storage. This platform is shown below:
Figure 5.3: Isometric view of the portable computation platform (left). Side view of the
portable computation platform (right).
This platform contains the necessary equipment for the experiment. The components were
screwed into acrylic platforms which were then stacked on top of the PCB to minimise the
space occupied by the experiment within the incubator, due to the incubator also being
used for other experiments.
The platform includes a Raspberry Pi 5 for computation, a Digilent Discovery 2 device
for waveform generation and signal acquisition, a Tinkerforge bricklet stack for temperature
measurement and relay control, a thermocouple and a powered USB hub. The Raspberry
Pi was responsible for interfacing between the components. It ran the code responsible for
tracking and saving the impedance data to the hard drive. The Digilent Discovery 2 device
is able to generate stochastic voltages. This was used to provide the voltage signal to the
electrodes via SMA cables. The Tinkerforge stack is a series of Tinkerforge components.
This particular stack features two ‘Master Bricks’ which connect to quad relays and the
thermocouple reader, managing digital communication. These relays are the
aforementioned relays responsible for toggling on and off to select the electrode pair to
excite with the voltage signal. The Master Bricks interface between the Raspberry Pi and
the Relays. The stack also contains a Tinkerforge thermocouple bricklet. This allows for
the use of a thermocouple, for the purposes of temperature monitoring. Since the bacteria
are incubating, it is imperative that they remain at a constant temperature of 29◦C.
41
---PAGE BREAK---
5.0.3 Experimental Procedure
To determine the viability of the sensor for this use case, experiments were performed to
trial the sensor and monitor any adverse or previously unknown effects. For this, the K.
Xylinusbacteria solutions first had to be prepared. The process of preparing the bacteria
samples was performed by senior researcher Dr. Cathy Hogan. The bacteria is purchased
as frozen stock. The bacteria is then treated to begin the growth process. After an
approximate duration of 10 days, the bacteria will have reached the point where they begin
to form a pellicle layer in the solution used to treat them. When this is the case, the
bacteria can be transferred to the sugar solutions at which point the experiment can be
performed. The experimental procedure is as follows:
1. Place the PCB into an Autoclave to sterilise.
2. Take off the pre-populated well plate lid and place the PCB on top of the well plate
so that the electrodes are submerged by the media. This is done underneath a
biosafety cabinet to reduce contamination of the samples with external bacteria.
3. Screw the portable computation platform onto the PCB and establish all connections
between peripherals and the PCB.
4. Run all of the necessary programs to start the experiment. Place the set up into the
incubator, taking special care to not perturb the samples within the well plate.
5. Remotely monitor the experiment set up to ensure all of the code is running, the
thermocouple output shows a consistent temperature etc.
6. After a period of approximately 7 days, remove the set up from the incubator and
observe the samples and the data from the hard drive.
During this procedure it was found that the software would throw errors after a random
duration of time. It was determined that the Raspberry Pi was likely the issue. Therefore,
it was decided to forgo the device and use a laptop instead. For this to fit within the
incubator, the portable computation platform now needed to be modified. Instead of
stacking on top of the PCB, it was decided to place these platforms alongside the PCB.
This is because the experimental set up now had to be raised, since a laptop now had to fit
within the incubator and there were other samples to avoid.
42
---PAGE BREAK---
Figure 5.4: Image of the revised experimental set up. This was placed on top of a small
table and placed within the incubator.
However, this set up also led to issues. The heat from the laptop would interfere with the
temperature regulation of the incubator, and resulted in the overall incubator temperature
reaching as high as 45◦C, which is outside of the acceptable temperature range for the
bacteria.
A third set up was then determined. Here, the platform and PCB remained within the
incubator, but connections were made to an external desktop computer as opposed to an
internal laptop. This allows the use of arbitrarily powerful computers, since size is no
longer an issue, and also removes the need for a hard drive. This also eliminates the need
to worry about the heat generation of the system since the computer is out of the
incubator. A worry with this set up was the partial opening left in the incubator to allow
the external connection to the desktop. However, upon monitoring the temperature of the
incubator, it was observed that the internal temperature stayed between 29◦C and 30◦C,
which is acceptable for the experiment.
43
---PAGE BREAK---
Figure 5.5: Image of the final set up. Here the computation platform is simplified due to no
longer requiring the Raspberry Pi 5 and the hard drive. The set up is attached to the side
of the incubator walls to allow for other samples to fit within the incubator. The devices
connect to a desktop situated external to, but beside the incubator (not shown).
5.0.4 Results
The well plate was configured to hold a series of different sugar solutions so that the
growth curves associated with these different solutions could be addressed.
Figure 5.6: Layout of sugar solutions used in the experiment.
For this experiment 5 different sugars were used: Glucose, Lactose, Sucrose, Corn Steep
Liquor and Starch (not technically a sugar but consists of many sugar molecules joined
together). From the figure it can be seen that Glucose, Lactose and Sucrose based solutions
were placed on their own row. Corn Steep Liquor and Starch occupied three wells within
the same row.
After the experiment, it was expected to see a solid pellicle layer form at the top of
each of the solutions. However, this was not the case. The well plate after having ran the
experiment looked like so:
44
---PAGE BREAK---
Figure 5.7: Well plate showing the sugar-bacteria solutions after the experiment.
From this it can be seen that the solutions have become discoloured. There were some
transparent gel-like pellicles, but these dissolved upon retrieval. This is not expected and
suggests that something was wrong with the experiment, and so the data from the
experiment will not be helpful in identifying growth curves.
Alongside the changes in the solution, the electrodes were also left with an accumulation on
their surface and were left permanently discoloured.
Figure 5.8: Discolouration and accumulation on the electrodes on the PCB after running
the experiment.
45
---PAGE BREAK---
Interpretation
One of the issues leading to the asymmetry in the colour of the solutions can be attributed
to hardware. Due to the available hardware within the laboratory, TinkerForge 2.0 Quad
Relay Bricklets were utilised for the purposes of multiplexing the electrodes. Since six relay
boards are required and there were only three relays, and additional three were purchased.
However, due to the fact that production has ceased for the 2.0 bricklets, the newer version
(TinkerForge 2.1 Quad Relay Bricklets) were purchased. After some investigation, it
appears that the newer bricklets were not working as intended during the experiment. It
seems as if they are not compatible with the experiment and so the 2.0 version of the relays
should be used in the future. However, since these are no longer being produced, sourcing
these is difficult and so alternative relays may need to be used. This should lead to a
consistency of results between wells containing the same sugar sample.
For the issue of the solutions being discoloured, the reason for this could be due to the
coating of the electrodes. The electrodes used are the pins found in D-sub connectors.
These are copper and have a gold coating applied to them. This works for the purposes of
the experiment due to gold being nonreactive. However, since the pins were not designed
for this application, the gold coating may have imperfections, due to the thickness of the
coating, the porosity of gold etc. This means that copper is exposed to the solutions and
can interfere with the electrochemical reactions within the solution, as is observed in
electrolysis.
As a voltage is applied across the electrodes, a pH shift is experienced in the solution.
This shift can result in the solution experiencing transient periods when it is alkaline vs
transient periods when it is more acidic. During acidic transients, the copper at the
electrode surfaces releases Cu2+ ions into the solution. During an alkaline transient,
Copper (II) Hydroxide ( Cu(OH)2) forms at the electrode surface. These are both blue in
colour and can account for the unexpected discolourisation of the solutions.
This, coupled with the wiring scheme of the PCB can also explain the reason why for a
given electrode pair, one electrode has an accumulation of blue deposit on its surface,
whilst the other has an accumulation of some orange deposit. This is because the right
most electrode for an electrode pair is connected through a resistor to ground, whereas the
left most electrode is exposed to the input stochastic voltage (directions are referenced
from Figure 5.2 a).
From this experiment it seems pertinent to source electrodes with thicker coating and
to resolve the issue with the quad relays before an assumption can be made as to the
viability of the sensor for this application.
46
---PAGE BREAK---
5.0.5 Improvements
From the initial experiment it was observed that the electrodes were not centered within
the wells. Whilst this has no effect on the bacteria and is not attributable to the lack of
results from the experiment, it can affect the electric field generated by the electrodes and
affect the impedance data. I therefore created a fixture that can be used to both clamp the
PCB to the well plate (eliminating any air gaps and preventing slipping) and align the
electrodes to fit in the center of each of the wells.
Figure 5.9: 3D printed piece that clamps and aligns the well plate and PCB together for
more reliable impedance data for future experiments.
This piece take approximately 3 hours to print and so it can be easily produced and used
on the day of an experiment. Since the piece is 3D printed, it cannot be put in an
Autoclave and must therefore be sterilised with a 70% alcohol solution before use.
The well plate fits into the base and is held in place by the small ledge observable in the
figure. The PCB is then placed on top of the well plate and is constrained at the corners
by the piece. This forces the electrodes to align with the center of the wells. The corners
have been used to minimise material use and allow a clear view of the side profiles of the
well plate, so that visual checks on the experiment can be made without disturbing the
samples. At the corners, there are holes which have been tapped to fit M4 screws. These
are used to clamp the PCB to the well plate.
Figure 5.10: Future experiment set up. The PCB is clamped with washers to stay in place.
47
---PAGE BREAK---
48
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 6
Future Work
Throughout this project, several modifications have been made to improve the performance
of the two kernel identification programs, in terms of speed, memory usage and accuracy of
the calculated model. Both programs show promise, but are very difficult to set up in a
way that provides a high VAF model, with a set of kernels which provide insight into the
electrochemical interactions occuring within the system.
A part of this issue lies with the lack of knowledge on the systems being studied. For
example, the use of high voltages and a low 100 Hz sampling frequency led to curdling of
the milk, which severely impacted the quality of the impedance data. Similarly, within the
well plate experiment, the use of high voltages (4.5 V) lead to exacerbated pH shifts
observed by the solutions and increased the ion transfer from the electrode surfaces,
resulting in discoloured samples whose results were of no use. Given the sensitivity of the
systems to the conditions of the input signal and given the sensitivity of both programs to
the hyper parameters used, the next steps for this project involve repeating the
experiments and improving the quality of the impedance data that is used to generate the
Volterra kernels.
One way of doing this is to utilise the alignment and clamp piece that was printed, for
the next well-plate experiment, and to modify the input signal characteristics.
In addition, a modified well plate sensor can be designed. This can utilise a smaller
spacing between the electrodes, and feature removable electrodes at the PCB interface.
This would allow corroded electrodes to simply be swapped out without having to create a
new PCB for every experiment. This, alongside the aforementioned tasks of finding new
compatible relays and having the electrodes re-coated with a thicker coat of Gold, should
provide a clear pathway for the development of the well plate sensor.
It will also be useful to incorporate the step size and averaging feature from the
‘Tensor’ kernel identification program, into the MLP-Volterra program. This will enable
the use of the MLP-Volterra program as the main software for analysis since it has been
shown to run significantly faster than the Tensor approach whilst relying on less memory.
Finally, it may be useful to source a more powerful computer, with higher than 24 Gb
of memory on the GPU for extremely long input signals, which will provide the best chance
of extracting an accurate set of Volterra kernels, especially given the current knowledge of
the systems being studied and how there is not enough information to make simplifying
assumptions to the kernels to reduce the number of parameters used by the model.
49
---PAGE BREAK---
50
---PAGE BREAK---
Chapter 7
Conclusion
Through the course of this research, two separate algorithms have been developed to
identify the Volterra kernels representing a system. These have been optimised and
bench-marked with promising results with the ‘Tungsten Filament’ experiment detailed in
Section 3.0.3.
Alongside this further experimentation has been conducted to model the impedance
behaviour of milk and the electrochemical interactions within sugar solutions when
incubated and housing K. Xylinus bacteria. Through these experiments, several failure
modes and sub-optimal approaches have been discovered, enabling the further
improvement of the next iteration of experiments. This should hopefully lead to the point
where extremely clean data can be extracted from the systems and can be used to generate
a set of realistic Volterra kernels.
51
---PAGE BREAK---
52
---PAGE BREAK---
Bibliography
[1] M. Aling, An electrochemical sensor development platform , 2022.
[2] M. Aling, B. Iqbal, K. Cheng, and I. Hunter, Nonlinear electrochemical sensor for
monitoring microbial growth in liquids , Provisional application for US patent
63/567.528 (20 Mar. 2024).
[3] M. Aling, K. Cheng, and I. Hunter. “A fast nonlinear electrochemical sensor:
Monitoring microbial growth,” MIT Bioinstrumentation Laboratory. (Jan. 2023).
[4] M. K. Saini. “Signals and systems: Static and dynamic system.” (Nov. 2021), url:
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/signals-and-systems-static-and-dynamic-system
(visited on 05/15/2024).
[5] A. Farina, “Simultaneous measurement of impulse response and distortion with a
swept-sine technique,” Nov. 2000.
[6] G. Mzyk, Wiener System . Springer International Publishing, 2014. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03596-3_3.
[7] O. T. Demir and E. Bjornson, “The bussgang decomposition of nonlinear systems:
Basic theory and mimo extensions [lecture notes],” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine ,
vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 131–136, 2021. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.3025538.
[8] J. Bussgang, L. Ehrman, and J. Graham, “Analysis of nonlinear systems with
multiple inputs,” Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 1088–1119, 1974. doi:
10.1109/PROC.1974.9572.
[9] E. Eşkinat, S. Johnson, and W. Luyben, “Use of Hammerstein models in
identification of nonlinear systems,” AIChE Journal , vol. 37, pp. 255–268, Feb. 1991.
doi: 10.1002/aic.690370211.
[10] V. Volterra, “Sopra le funzioni che dipendono da altre funzioni,” vol. III, pp. 97–105,
1887.
[11] V. Volterra, Theory of Functionals and of Integrals and Integro-Differential
Equations . New York: Dover Publications, 1927, Original work published in Spanish,
translated version reprinted in 1959.
[12] “Volterra series’.” (Dec. 2023), url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Volterra_series&oldid=1191616586
(visited on 02/08/2024).
[13] E. Keogh and A. Mueen, Curse of Dimensionality . Springer US, 2017. url:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7687-1_192.
53
---PAGE BREAK---
[14] A. Poghossian, H. Geissler, and M. Schöning, “Rapid methods and sensors for milk
quality monitoring and spoilage detection,” Biosensors Bioelectronics , vol. 140,
p. 111272, Apr. 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.bios.2019.04.040.
[15] G. Durante, W. Beccaro, F. Lima, and H. Peres, “Electrical impedance sensor for
real-time detection of bovine milk adulteration,” IEEE Sensors Journal , vol. 16,
pp. 1–1, Jan. 2015. doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2015.2494624.
[16] R. Gómez-Sjöberg, D. Morisette, and R. Bashir, “Impedance microbiology-on-a-chip:
Microfluidic bioprocessor for rapid detection of bacterial metabolism,” English (US),
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems , vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 829–838, Aug. 2005,
issn: 1057-7157. doi: 10.1109/JMEMS.2005.845444.
[17] “The dangers of drinking raw milk.” (May 2024), url:
https://www.health.ny.gov/diseases/communicable/raw_milk_related/dangers_of_
drinking_raw_milk.htm#:~:text=What%20kinds%20of%20harmful%20germs,with%
20H5N1%20avian%20influenza%20virus. (visited on 05/19/2024).
[18] A. Bevilacqua, M. R. Corbo, and M. Sinigaglia, “Spoilage of milk and dairy
products,” in The Microbiological Quality of Food . Elsevier, 2017.
[19] S. Potts. “Subclinical mastitis: The stealthy intruder.” (Mar. 2022), url:
https://extension.umd.edu/resource/subclinical-mastitis-stealthy-intruder/ (visited
on 05/19/2024).
[20] J. Gonçalves, C. Kamphuis, J. Vernooij, J. Araújo, R. Grenfell, L. Juliano,
K. Anderson, H. Hogeveen, and M. Santos, “Pathogen effects on milk yield and
composition in chronic subclinical mastitis in dairy cows,” The Veterinary Journal ,
vol. 262, p. 105473, May 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2020.105473.
[21] C. Viguier, S. Arora, N. Gilmartin, K. Welbeck, and R. O’Kennedy, “Mastitis
detection: Current trends and future perspectives,” Trends in Biotechnology , vol. 27,
pp. 486–493, Aug. 2009.
[22] “Herbal and probiotic supplements for addressing mastitis and improving udder
health in dairy.” (Mar. 2022), url: https://vinayakingredients.com/herbal-and-
probiotic-supplements-for-addressing-mastitis-and-improving-udder-health-in-dairy/
(visited on 05/19/2024).
[23] P. Ruegg, “A 100-year review: Mastitis detection, management, and prevention,”
Journal of Dairy Science , vol. 100, pp. 10381–10397, Dec. 2017. doi:
10.3168/jds.2017-13023.
[24] M. Korenberg and I. Hunter, “The identification of nonlinear biological systems:
Volterra kernel approaches,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering , 1996.
[25] W. J. Rugh, Nonlinear System Theory: The Volterra–Wiener Approach . Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981. url:
http://rfic.eecs.berkeley.edu/~niknejad/ee242/pdf/volterra_book.pdf.
[26] S. Spanbauer and I. Hunter, “Coarse-grained nonlinear system identification,” ArXiv,
vol. abs/2010.06830, 2020. url:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:222341628.
54
---PAGE BREAK---
[27] “Calculation of the volterra kernels of non-linear dynamic systems using an artificial
neural network.” (Jul. 1994), url: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00202758 (visited on
05/19/2024).
[28] “Neural networks from scratch: 2-layers perceptron — part 2.” (Jun. 2022), url:
https://pub.towardsai.net/neural-networks-from-scratch-2-layers-perceptron-part-2-
d1e14546a7d4 (visited on 05/20/2024).
[29]Analog discovery 2: 100ms/s usb oscilloscope, logic analyzer, and variable power
supply, Accessed: 2024-05-22. url: https://digilent.com/shop/analog-discovery-2-
100ms-s-usb-oscilloscope-logic-analyzer-and-variable-power-supply/.
[30] “Falcon 24-well clear flat bottom tc-treated multiwell cell culture plate, with lid,
sterile, 50/case.” (), url: https://ecatalog.corning.com/life-sciences/b2c/US/en/Cell-
Culture/Cell-Culture-Vessels/Multiwell-Plates/Falcon%C2%AE-Plates/p/353047
(visited on 05/20/2024).
55
---PAGE BREAK---
